The "EPL (dynamic predictor).py" file predicts the 2025-2026 premier league 
season using both factors from before the season and during the season. 
As the name suggests, it can make dynamic predictions at any time of the 
year so its predictions change as the season progresses. 

To run the file yourself, download all files as a zip on github. Open the folder 
up on VS code. Then, open up the "EPL (dynamic predictor).py" file. 
This file does require an API key from https://api.football-data.org as there are 
functions that retrieve live data from the site. You can get your own api key by 
making an account for free. Then, add it as a string between '' under the variable 
"API_TOKEN". Finally, run the python file in the terminal to get a prediction. 

This predictor will use preseason odds, current league record and recent 
form (last 5 games record) as deciding factors. Both league record and 
recent form are factors that occur during the season so if the prediction
is made before the season begins, these will have no influence at all 
whereas later in the season, these 2 factor will have far more influence 
than betting odds made before the season starts. 

To begin this project, I needed to use all 3 factors and convert them 
so that each factor would play a role in deciding how likely it is for a 
team to win in one match against another team. 

The first factor was preseason odds. These odds are manually added in from 
bet365 so they may be different now from the time they were added in. 
Using these odds, I gave each team a strength rating and used their strength 
ratings to determine probabilities for how a match will end between any 2 
sides. For a more detailed explanation for this factor, check out the 
text file for the preseason prediction file. 

The second factor is a team's current league record (how well they are 
performing this season). This factor has a high influence as the season 
continues and calculates each team's win, draw and loss probabilities. 

The third factor takes each team's recent form from the last 5 games 
and uses that to calculate a team's win, draw and loss probabilities. 
This factor has a  small influence because form can change at any time but
sometimes, teams will achieve the same match results over a number of games. 

After all 3 factors have their probabilities calculated, they are each 
given a weight for how much influence they have and final match 
probabilities are calculated. Then, using these final probabilities, 
we can simulate each game by randomly choosing a result based on those 
probabilities. Once every game that's not been played yet is simulated, 
than we have a final league table. 


